The Joe Rogan experience.
Yeah. So let's, let's get going. Um, so taking it from the top, let's,
let's discuss, give us your take on how we got here, because this is, uh,
it's been very strange, obviously, uh,
the president completely miscalculated what was gonna happen and the way he was
explaining it to the news,
he was kind of saying that it was just a few cases and they'll be gone.
And now obviously New York city shut down.
The entire country is separated from each other.
Everybody is isolating at home. Give us your take on how we got here.
Well, you know, the, the truth is, uh,
we knew this was coming or something like it. We had a head up and, and,
and even a, even a heads up before last year,
because this is now our third major coronavirus disaster of
the 21st century. We had, uh, what's called SAR,
severe acute respiratory syndrome in 2003,
that started in China and caused a terrible epidemic in Toronto.
It actually took the, uh, the rolling stones to do a concert,
to bring the economy back to Toronto in 2003.
And then it was mayor's coronavirus infection in, uh, 2012.
And this is the third one.
So we actually realized that coronaviruses were gonna become a new thing.
And we embarked on a big coronavirus vaccine program a decade ago.
And, um,
and each time they've caused devastating hospital epidemics they've affected
healthcare workers. So, uh,
the point is this unfortunately has become a new normal for the globe is
terrible coronavirus, uh, epidemics. And, uh,
we saw this one coming up in, at the end of 2019 in China. And,
uh, I knew we were in for trouble because that's what coronaviruses do.
So you knew that we were gonna be in trouble because there was no way they could
contain it and keep it in China.
Well, the, the difference with this one, uh, compared to the other two,
was this the other two SARS and mayors. Now we call this new one, saw ours two.
So the were SARS one, then mayors, then SARS two.
So both SARS one and mayors made you so sick and had such
a high case fatality rate that anybody who got it was almost immediately
hospitalized. And basically out of the community, the,
the difference with this one, ironically, is it, as it's pretty lethal,
it's about five to 10 times more lethal than regular flu seasonal flu.
Uh, but also there's a big group of people who don't get very sick at all.
And so you have this sort of perfect mix where it's not the most
lethal infection we've ever seen.
It's not the most transmi infection we've ever seen,
but it's high enough in both categories that it combines in this very toxic way.
So what you have is you have a group of people who are getting very sick are in
the intensive care unit, like older people,
those with diabetes and hypertension,
even a group of younger people who are getting it very sick,
and then a larger group who are only getting mildly sick,
who could still walk around the community and be out and about in stores and
restaurants and infecting everybody. And so this is what's caused the problem.
Uh, it's a, it's highly transmissible, big group of people walking around,
spreading it and a smaller subset,
but a big subset who are getting very sick and even dying in intensive care
units. So that's, what's playing out in New York city right now, for instance.
Do we know why so many people are asymptomatic?
We don't, uh, we really don't, uh, there's a rough, uh,
correlation with age. So younger people seem to do better.
And actually kids seem to do really well with this infection. They don't,
they don't get with, with one exception that I'll tell you about in a minute.
Most kids don't get very sick at all,
but they're helping with the community spread. And, and we don't, uh,
quite know why also, but something that's very important.
And one of the reasons why, uh,
I really wanted to come on and talk to you about COVID is we there's this
buzz out there in the community that it's only old people that are getting
sick and dying and going to ICUs. But in fact,
the centers for disease control came out with this very chilling document a few
weeks ago,
showing that about a third of the very sick people in the hospital are under
the age of 40 or 44.
So between 20 and 44 young adults are getting very sick and that word
has not gotten out adequately because when the infect disinfection first
appeared in central China,
it was all about older individuals over the age of 70.
Those were diabetes and hypertension, and we didn't hear about the young adults,
but then for reasons that we don't understand,
we saw this big group in Italy and France, uh,
in Spain of younger adults. And we're seeing that play out in the us.
And I know, and on the people who, you know, listen to you and watch you,
you know, it's a big group between that age of 20 and 44,
and they really need to a year that they're at risk for severe illness,
despite what they might have heard.
Previously. Well, we have a friend, uh, Michael yo,
who was actually on a podcast with me the week before he went to New York.
He was there that weekend actually. And that's when he got it.
So he got COVID 19 in Manhattan and then flew back
sick. And here's what's really, maybe you could help me with this. Uh,
he said he was feeling terrible and then took Advil and it
got exponentially worse. Is that coincidental? Do you think, I mean, there's,
there's been talks of avoiding ibuprofen. Michael's 45 years old,
very healthy, robust guy. So when he was, I mean,
he was in the hospital for a week and his words were, I almost died. I mean,
he was really, really concerned. What, what about, what about an ibuprofen?
So, uh,
there's been a lot of buzz on the internet about ibuprofen and then the world
health organization came out with a specific statement saying those are rumors.
So there's not a lot of evidence to say that you get worse with ibuprofen.
Probably he was just one of those young adults. That's gonna get very sick.
And that's what this virus does.
It has the ability to get deep into the pulmonary system in your lungs,
binds to receptors on the cells of your lungs and causes a terrible
pneumonia. And on top of it, you get a big inflammatory response. So it really,
uh, can, uh, it's a severe pneumonia could even prevent your ability to breathe.
And that's why so many people who are getting really sick with this virus have
to go on respirators.
That's exactly what happened to Michael. He got pneumonia. Um,
so there's is that there's a rumor that you shouldn't
take ibuprofen, but is that unfounded?
Are you advising people to take ibuprofen?
Do you think they should just avoid it just in case and where did this rumor
start from and what, what is the concern with ibuprofen?
And then, and then you've got the problem. You know, some people, uh, you know,
also say don't take aspirin because if this is a respiratory virus infection,
there could be a severe reaction, uh, with, with aspirin as well. So for now,
uh, you know, and, uh, I said, the other thing, Joe is anything we say today,
uh, I might look like the biggest idiot in the world tomorrow or next week.
And that's because this is a brand new virus and we've never seen before, right?
So we're on a steep learning curve.
So we're learning new things about this virus, uh, every day. So that's why, uh,
you know, so many things I'm gonna say today,
if I sound like I'm waffling or hedging, it's it's because I am, uh, uh, we, we,
we're learning so much, that's new about this virus.
So it's really important that everybody be really mindful and pay attention
to real health information that, uh, that from accurate sources,
because things move, things change. As we learn more about this,
this is a virus that we didn't even know existed about four months
ago. And, um, we've learned about an incredible period of time.
The Chinese put up a lot of information on these pre-print servers about what
the virus is, what the sequence is, the genetic code,
what the receptor binds to when we had the original SAR,
we call this new one SARS too, the COVID 19. So the VI,
the disease is called COVID.
The virus is called SARS two SARS coronavirus two.
When we had the original SARS one,
it took us over a year to learn all that information.
Now everything's been compressed in a few weeks, so it's really extraordinary,
but there's still so much, so much we're learning right now.
That I'm so glad you brought that up,
cuz that is really important for people to understand people that maybe haven't
looked into the complications that are involved in trying to recognize
treatments and cures for a virus that it is it's you everyone's learning.
Yeah. And also, you know,
and everything we have known so far about the virus is what happened in China.
And it turns out that Chinese are,
have some genetic differences to Europeans and, and Americans and,
and things can change depending on, it's not just the pathogen.
It's also what we call the host, the person too. So the fact, you know,
that the virus affected young adults in Europe and the us S in
a way that did not necessarily occur in China, uh, is important. And so we,
or keep we,
and then who knows what happens when this virus goes into Latin America or
India, or Sub-Saharan Africa. It may,
and it's not because the virus is mutating necessarily.
It's just that there's also the host component as well,
which is quite important.
Well, that's of the, uh,
issues that people are having in terms of blood type there's,
there's all this talk of certain blood types,
maybe more susceptible to the virus, particularly blood type a.
Yeah, well actually, um,
this is actually well known in the infectious disease literature there. I mean,
there's a whole, I put one up on Twitter, I think a week or so ago.
Uh there's you know, dozens of different pathogens,
both including viruses and bacteria that behave differently depending on a
person's blood type. So host genetics influences things quite a bit.
I.